---
layout: post
title:  "EAC2: 1.1 Introduction"
date:   2016-04-06 19:12:03
categories: compiler
tags: c++
---

* content
{:toc}

 - A compiler is simply a computer program that translates other computer programs to prepare them for execution.
the output program is expressed in the operations available on some specific processor,
 - A compiler often includes an optimizer that analyzes and rewrites that intermediate form.
 - Compilers that target programming languages rather than the instruction set of a computer are 
 often called source-to-source translators.
 - A virtual machine is a simulator for some processor. It is an interpreter for that machine’s instruction set.
 - Interpreters and compilers have much in common
   - Both analyze the input program and determine whether or not itis a valid program. 
   - Both build an internal model of the structure and mean-ing of the program. 
   - Both determine where to store values during execution.'
   - However, interpreting the code to produce a result is quite different from emitting a translated program 
   that can be executed to produce the result.
 - A good compiler contains a microcosm of computer science. 
   - It makes practical use of greedy algorithms (register allocation), 
   - heuristic search techniques(list scheduling), 
   - graph algorithms (dead-code elimination), dynamic programming (instruction selection), 
   - finite automata and push-down automata(scanning and parsing), 
   - and fixed-point algorithms (data-flow analysis).
   - It deals with problems such as dynamic allocation, synchronization, naming, 
    locality, memory hierarchy management,and pipeline scheduling.
 - The Fundamental Principles of Compilation
   - The compiler must preserve the meaning of the program being compiled.
   - The compiler must improve the input program in some discernible way.
   
   
